So the French Academy of Sciences convened a
committee to investigate the claims of animal magnetism,
with very distinguished figures including
Benjamin Franklin, Antoine Lavoisier and so on.
They witnessed lots of magnetic séances,
they saw lots of people having convulsions,
they experimented on themselves,
they had themselves mesmerised
– some of them felt something,
and some of them didn’t.
And then they ran a whole series of
blind experimental trials,
where they had one object magnetised
– a cup, for example –
and placed it among a load of other objects,
to see if people who were under
the magnetic influence could tell
which one it was coming from.
And what they established pretty rapidly
was that magnetised subjects couldn’t
distinguish which object had been
magnetised and which hadn’t,
that the effect was all in the mind,
or as they put it in the final
concluding paragraph of their report:
“the imagination, without magnetism,
can produce convulsions;
but magnetism without the imagination
can produce nothing”.
So that seemed to be a pretty definitive judgement,
but actually it left a crucial question open:
if animal magnetism was all
in the imagination,
did that mean that the effects weren’t real?
Or, did it mean that the imagination
was actually a much more powerful force
than anyone had considered?